README.md, before:

## TRMNL BYOS (PHP/Laravel)

[![tests](https://github.com/usetrmnl/byos_laravel/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/usetrmnl/byos_laravel/actions/workflows/test.yml)

TRMNL BYOS Laravel is a self-hostable implementation of a TRMNL server, built with Laravel.
It enables you to manage TRMNL devices, generate screens dynamically, and can act as a proxy for the native cloud service (native plugins, recipes).
Inspired by [usetrmnl/byos_sinatra](https://github.com/usetrmnl/byos_sinatra).

If you are looking for a Laravel package designed to streamline the development of both public and private TRMNL plugins, check out [bnussbau/trmnl-laravel](https://github.com/bnussbau/laravel-trmnl).

![Screenshot](README_byos-screenshot.png)
![Screenshot](README_byos-screenshot-dark.png)

* 👉 [more Screenshots](screenshots/SCREENSHOTS.md)

### Key Features

* 📡 Device Information – Display battery status, WiFi strength, firmware version, and more.
* 🔍 Auto-Join – Automatically detects and adds devices from your local network.
* 🖥️ Screen Generation – Supports Plugins, API, Markup or updates via Code.
* 🔄 TRMNL API Proxy – Can act as a proxy for the native cloud service (requires TRMNL Developer Edition).
    * This enables a hybrid setup – for example, you can update your custom Train Monitor every 5 minutes in the morning, while displaying native TRMNL plugins throughout the day.
* 🌙 Dark Mode – Switch between light and dark mode.
* 🐳 Deployment – Dockerized setup for easier hosting (Dockerfile, docker-compose).
* 🛠️ Devcontainer support for easier development.

### 🎯 Target Audience

This project is for developers who are looking for a self-hosted server for devices running the TRMNL firmware.
It serves as a starter kit, giving you the flexibility to build and extend it however you like.

### Support ❤️
This repo is maintained voluntarily by [@bnussbau](https://github.com/bnussbau).

Support the development of this package by purchasing a TRMNL device through the referral link: https://usetrmnl.com/?ref=laravel-trmnl. At checkout, use the code `laravel-trmnl` to receive a $15 discount on your purchase.

### Hosting

Run everywhere, where Docker is supported: Raspberry Pi, VPS, NAS, Container Cloud Service (Cloud Run, ...)

Docker Compose file located at: [docker/prod/docker-compose.yml](docker/prod/docker-compose.yml).

For production use, generate a new APP_KEY and set the environment variable `APP_KEY=`.

### Requirements

* PHP >= 8.2
* ext-imagick
* puppeteer [see Browsershot docs](https://spatie.be/docs/browsershot/v4/requirements)


### Local Development

#### Clone the repository

```bash
git clone git@github.com:usetrmnl/byos_laravel.git
```

#### Copy environment file

```bash
cp .env.example .env
php artisan key:generate
```

#### Install dependencies

```bash
composer install
npm i
```

#### Run migrations

```bash
php artisan migrate --seed
```

#### Run the server

To expose the built-in server to the local network, you can run the following command:

```bash
php artisan serve  --host=0.0.0.0 --port 4567
```

### Docker
Use the provided Dockerfile, or docker-compose file to run the server in a container.

#### .devcontainer

Open this repository in Visual Studio Code with the Dev Containers extension installed. This will automatically build the devcontainer and start the server.

Copy the .env.example.local to .env:

```bash
cp .env.example.local .env
```

Run migrations and seed the database:

```bash
php artisan migrate --seed
```

Link storage to expose public assets:

```bash
php artisan storage:link
```

Server is ready. Visit tab "Ports" in VSCode and visit the "Forwarded Address" in your browser.

Login with user / password `admin@example.com` / `admin@example.com`

### Demo Plugins

Run the ExampleRecipesSeeder to seed the database with example plugins:

```bash
php artisan db:seed --class=ExampleRecipesSeeder
```

* Zen Quotes
* This Day in History
* Weather
* Train Departure Monitor
* Home Assistant

### Usage

#### Environment Variables

| environment                   | description                                                      | default           |
|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|
| `TRMNL_PROXY_BASE_URL`        | Base URL of the native TRMNL service                             | https://trmnl.app |
| `TRMNL_PROXY_REFRESH_MINUTES` | How often should the server fetch new images from native service | 15                |
| `REGISTRATION_ENABLED`        | Allow user registration via Webinterface                         | 1                 |
| `FORCE_HTTPS`                 | If your server handles SSL termination, enforce HTTPS.           | 0                 |
| `PHP_OPCACHE_ENABLE`          | Enable PHP Opcache                                               | 0                 |

#### Login

If your environment is local, you can access the server at `http://localhost:4567` and login with user / password
`admin@example.com` / `admin@example.com`, otherwise register. With environment variable `REGISTRATION_ENABLED` you can control, if registration is allowed.

#### ➕ Add Your TRMNL Device

##### Auto-Join (Local Network)

1. Switch on the “Permit Auto-Join” toggle in the header. For that to work only one user can be registered.
2. New devices on your local network will be detected and added automatically when connecting to the server.

✅ This is the easiest way to connect your devices with minimal effort.

##### Manually

1.	Open the Devices page:
      👉 http://localhost:4567/devices
2.	Click “Add New Device”.
3.	Retrieve your TRMNL MAC Address and API Key:
- You can grab the TRMNL Mac Address and API Key from the TRMNL Dashboard
- Alternatively, debug incoming requests to /api/setup to determine them

### ⚙️ Configure Server for Device

#### 📌 Firmware Version 1.4.6 or Newer

* Setup device
* After entering Wifi credentials, choose "Custom Server"
* Point to the URL of your server

#### Firmware Older Than 1.4.6

If your device firmware is older than 1.4.6, you need to flash a new firmware version to point it to your server.

See this YouTube guide: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3xehPW-PCOM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3xehPW-PCOM)

### 🖥️ Generate Screens

#### Markup via Web Interface

1.	Navigate to Plugins > Markup in the Web Interface.
2.	Enter your markup manually or select from the available templates.
3.	Save and apply the changes.

* Available Blade Components are listed here: [laravel-trmnl | Blade Components](https://github.com/bnussbau/laravel-trmnl/tree/main/resources/views/components)

#### 🎨 Blade View
* Edit `resources/views/trmnl.blade.php`
    * Available Blade Components are listed here: [laravel-trmnl | Blade Components](https://github.com/bnussbau/laravel-trmnl/tree/main/resources/views/components)
* To generate the screen, run

```bash
php artisan trmnl:screen:generate
```

#### Generate via API
You can dynamically update screens by sending a POST request.

* Send a POST request to `/api/screen` with the following payload

##### Header

`Authorization` `Bearer <TOKEN>`

##### Body

```json
{
    "markup": "<h1>Hello World</h1>"
}
```

Token can be retrieved under Plugins > API in the Web Interface.

#### 🛠️ Generate Screens Programmatically

You can fetch external data, process it, and generate screens dynamically.
* Fetch data from an external source.
* Either render it in a Blade view or directly insert markup.
* Use Laravel’s scheduler to automate updates.

#### 📌 Example: Fetch Train Monitor Data

This example retrieves data from [trmnl-train-monitor](https://github.com/bnussbau/trmnl-train-monitor) and updates the screen periodically.

##### Step 1: Create a new Artisan Command

```bash
php artisan make:command PluginTrainMonitorFetch
```

##### Step 2: Edit PluginTrainMonitorFetch.php

```php
class PluginTrainMonitorFetch extends Command
{
    protected $signature = 'plugin:train:fetch';

    protected $description = 'Fetches train monitor data and updates the screen';

    public function handle(): void
    {
        $markup = Http::get('https://oebb.trmnl.yourserver.at/markup')->json('markup');
        GenerateScreenJob::dispatchSync(1, $markup);
    }
}
```

##### Step 3: Schedule the Command in console.php

```php
Schedule::command('plugin:train:fetch')
    ->everyFiveMinutes()
    ->timezone('Europe/Vienna')
    ->between('5:00', '18:00');
```

This will automatically update the screen every 5 minutes between 5:00 AM and 6:00 PM local time.

### 🏗️ Roadmap

Here are some features and improvements that are open for contribution:

##### 🔌 Plugin System

- Ensure compatibility with the trmnl-laravel package.
- Implement auto-discovery for plugins.

##### 🖥️ “Native” Plugins

- Architecture for native plugins.
- Configuration UI

#####  Improve Code Coverage

- Expand Pest tests to cover more functionality.
- Increase code coverage

### 🤝 Contribution
Contributions are welcome! If you’d like to improve the project, follow these steps:

1.	Open an Issue
    - Before submitting a pull request, create an issue to discuss your idea.
    - Clearly describe the feature or bug fix you want to work on.
2.	Fork the Repository & Create a Branch
3.  Make Your Changes & Add Tests
    - Ensure your code follows best practices.
    - Add Pest tests to cover your changes.
4.	Run Tests
      - `php artisan test`
5.  Submit a Pull Request (PR)
    - Push your branch and create a PR.
    - Provide a clear description of your changes.

Thank you for contributing!

### License
MIT

Commit message:

docs: add instructions to setup cloud proxy with a fresh device

README.md, after:

## TRMNL BYOS (PHP/Laravel)

[![tests](https://github.com/usetrmnl/byos_laravel/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/usetrmnl/byos_laravel/actions/workflows/test.yml)

TRMNL BYOS Laravel is a self-hostable implementation of a TRMNL server, built with Laravel.
It enables you to manage TRMNL devices, generate screens dynamically, and can act as a proxy for the native cloud service (native plugins, recipes).
Inspired by [usetrmnl/byos_sinatra](https://github.com/usetrmnl/byos_sinatra).

If you are looking for a Laravel package designed to streamline the development of both public and private TRMNL plugins, check out [bnussbau/trmnl-laravel](https://github.com/bnussbau/laravel-trmnl).

![Screenshot](README_byos-screenshot.png)
![Screenshot](README_byos-screenshot-dark.png)

* 👉 [more Screenshots](screenshots/SCREENSHOTS.md)

### Key Features

* 📡 Device Information – Display battery status, WiFi strength, firmware version, and more.
* 🔍 Auto-Join – Automatically detects and adds devices from your local network.
* 🖥️ Screen Generation – Supports Plugins, API, Markup or updates via Code.
* 🔄 TRMNL API Proxy – Can act as a proxy for the native cloud service (requires TRMNL Developer Edition).
    * This enables a hybrid setup – for example, you can update your custom Train Monitor every 5 minutes in the morning, while displaying native TRMNL plugins throughout the day.
* 🌙 Dark Mode – Switch between light and dark mode.
* 🐳 Deployment – Dockerized setup for easier hosting (Dockerfile, docker-compose).
* 🛠️ Devcontainer support for easier development.

### 🎯 Target Audience

This project is for developers who are looking for a self-hosted server for devices running the TRMNL firmware.
It serves as a starter kit, giving you the flexibility to build and extend it however you like.

### Support ❤️
This repo is maintained voluntarily by [@bnussbau](https://github.com/bnussbau).

Support the development of this package by purchasing a TRMNL device through the referral link: https://usetrmnl.com/?ref=laravel-trmnl. At checkout, use the code `laravel-trmnl` to receive a $15 discount on your purchase.

### Hosting

Run everywhere, where Docker is supported: Raspberry Pi, VPS, NAS, Container Cloud Service (Cloud Run, ...)

Docker Compose file located at: [docker/prod/docker-compose.yml](docker/prod/docker-compose.yml).

For production use, generate a new APP_KEY and set the environment variable `APP_KEY=`.

### Requirements

* PHP >= 8.2
* ext-imagick
* puppeteer [see Browsershot docs](https://spatie.be/docs/browsershot/v4/requirements)


### Local Development

#### Clone the repository

```bash
git clone git@github.com:usetrmnl/byos_laravel.git
```

#### Copy environment file

```bash
cp .env.example .env
php artisan key:generate
```

#### Install dependencies

```bash
composer install
npm i
```

#### Run migrations

```bash
php artisan migrate --seed
```

#### Run the server

To expose the built-in server to the local network, you can run the following command:

```bash
php artisan serve  --host=0.0.0.0 --port 4567
```

### Docker
Use the provided Dockerfile, or docker-compose file to run the server in a container.

#### .devcontainer

Open this repository in Visual Studio Code with the Dev Containers extension installed. This will automatically build the devcontainer and start the server.

Copy the .env.example.local to .env:

```bash
cp .env.example.local .env
```

Run migrations and seed the database:

```bash
php artisan migrate --seed
```

Link storage to expose public assets:

```bash
php artisan storage:link
```

Server is ready. Visit tab "Ports" in VSCode and visit the "Forwarded Address" in your browser.

Login with user / password `admin@example.com` / `admin@example.com`

### Demo Plugins

Run the ExampleRecipesSeeder to seed the database with example plugins:

```bash
php artisan db:seed --class=ExampleRecipesSeeder
```

* Zen Quotes
* This Day in History
* Weather
* Train Departure Monitor
* Home Assistant

### Usage

#### Environment Variables

| environment                   | description                                                      | default           |
|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|
| `TRMNL_PROXY_BASE_URL`        | Base URL of the native TRMNL service                             | https://trmnl.app |
| `TRMNL_PROXY_REFRESH_MINUTES` | How often should the server fetch new images from native service | 15                |
| `REGISTRATION_ENABLED`        | Allow user registration via Webinterface                         | 1                 |
| `FORCE_HTTPS`                 | If your server handles SSL termination, enforce HTTPS.           | 0                 |
| `PHP_OPCACHE_ENABLE`          | Enable PHP Opcache                                               | 0                 |

#### Login

If your environment is local, you can access the server at `http://localhost:4567` and login with user / password
`admin@example.com` / `admin@example.com`, otherwise register. With environment variable `REGISTRATION_ENABLED` you can control, if registration is allowed.

#### ➕ Add Your TRMNL Device

##### Auto-Join (Local Network)

1. Switch on the “Permit Auto-Join” toggle in the header. For that to work only one user can be registered.
2. New devices on your local network will be detected and added automatically when connecting to the server.

✅ This is the easiest way to connect your devices with minimal effort.

##### Manually

1.	Open the Devices page:
      👉 http://localhost:4567/devices
2.	Click “Add New Device”.
3.	Retrieve your TRMNL MAC Address and API Key:
- You can grab the TRMNL Mac Address and API Key from the TRMNL Dashboard
- Alternatively, debug incoming requests to /api/setup to determine them

##### Activate fresh TRMNL Device with Cloud Proxy

1) Setup the TRMNL as in the official docs with the cloud service (connect one of the plugins to later verify it works)
2) Setup Laravel BYOS in your local network, create a user and login
3) In Laravel BYOS in the header bar, activate the toggle "Permit Auto-Join"
4) Connect your TRMNL via USB-C and re-flash in the browser via [https://usetrmnl.com/flash](https://usetrmnl.com/flash)
5) Go through the setup process again, in the screen where you provide the Wi-Fi credentials there is also option to set the Server URL. Use the local address of your Laravel BYOS
6) The device should automatically appear in the device list; you can deactivate the "Permit Auto-Join" toggle again.
7) In the devices list, activate the toggle "☁️ Proxy" for your device. (Make sure that the queue worker is active. In the docker image it should be running automatically.)
8) As long as no Laravel BYOS plugin is scheduled, the device will show your cloud plugins.

###### Troubleshooting

Make sure that your device has a Developer license, you should be able to verify by calling the `https://trmnl.app/api/display` endpoint.

* [https://docs.usetrmnl.com/go/private-api/introduction](https://docs.usetrmnl.com/go/private-api/introduction)
* [https://docs.usetrmnl.com/go/private-api/fetch-screen-content](https://docs.usetrmnl.com/go/private-api/fetch-screen-content)

### ⚙️ Configure Server for Device

#### 📌 Firmware Version 1.4.6 or Newer

* Setup device
* After entering Wifi credentials, choose "Custom Server"
* Point to the URL of your server

#### Firmware Older Than 1.4.6

If your device firmware is older than 1.4.6, you need to flash a new firmware version to point it to your server.

See this YouTube guide: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3xehPW-PCOM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3xehPW-PCOM)

### 🖥️ Generate Screens

#### Markup via Web Interface

1.	Navigate to Plugins > Markup in the Web Interface.
2.	Enter your markup manually or select from the available templates.
3.	Save and apply the changes.

* Available Blade Components are listed here: [laravel-trmnl | Blade Components](https://github.com/bnussbau/laravel-trmnl/tree/main/resources/views/components)

#### 🎨 Blade View
* Edit `resources/views/trmnl.blade.php`
    * Available Blade Components are listed here: [laravel-trmnl | Blade Components](https://github.com/bnussbau/laravel-trmnl/tree/main/resources/views/components)
* To generate the screen, run

```bash
php artisan trmnl:screen:generate
```

#### Generate via API
You can dynamically update screens by sending a POST request.

* Send a POST request to `/api/screen` with the following payload

##### Header

`Authorization` `Bearer <TOKEN>`

##### Body

```json
{
    "markup": "<h1>Hello World</h1>"
}
```

Token can be retrieved under Plugins > API in the Web Interface.

#### 🛠️ Generate Screens Programmatically

You can fetch external data, process it, and generate screens dynamically.
* Fetch data from an external source.
* Either render it in a Blade view or directly insert markup.
* Use Laravel’s scheduler to automate updates.

#### 📌 Example: Fetch Train Monitor Data

This example retrieves data from [trmnl-train-monitor](https://github.com/bnussbau/trmnl-train-monitor) and updates the screen periodically.

##### Step 1: Create a new Artisan Command

```bash
php artisan make:command PluginTrainMonitorFetch
```

##### Step 2: Edit PluginTrainMonitorFetch.php

```php
class PluginTrainMonitorFetch extends Command
{
    protected $signature = 'plugin:train:fetch';

    protected $description = 'Fetches train monitor data and updates the screen';

    public function handle(): void
    {
        $markup = Http::get('https://oebb.trmnl.yourserver.at/markup')->json('markup');
        GenerateScreenJob::dispatchSync(1, $markup);
    }
}
```

##### Step 3: Schedule the Command in console.php

```php
Schedule::command('plugin:train:fetch')
    ->everyFiveMinutes()
    ->timezone('Europe/Vienna')
    ->between('5:00', '18:00');
```

This will automatically update the screen every 5 minutes between 5:00 AM and 6:00 PM local time.

### 🏗️ Roadmap

Here are some features and improvements that are open for contribution:

##### 🔌 Plugin System

- Ensure compatibility with the trmnl-laravel package.
- Implement auto-discovery for plugins.

##### 🖥️ “Native” Plugins

- Architecture for native plugins.
- Configuration UI

#####  Improve Code Coverage

- Expand Pest tests to cover more functionality.
- Increase code coverage

### 🤝 Contribution
Contributions are welcome! If you’d like to improve the project, follow these steps:

1.	Open an Issue
    - Before submitting a pull request, create an issue to discuss your idea.
    - Clearly describe the feature or bug fix you want to work on.
2.	Fork the Repository & Create a Branch
3.  Make Your Changes & Add Tests
    - Ensure your code follows best practices.
    - Add Pest tests to cover your changes.
4.	Run Tests
      - `php artisan test`
5.  Submit a Pull Request (PR)
    - Push your branch and create a PR.
    - Provide a clear description of your changes.

Thank you for contributing!

### License
MIT
